---
title: Please Read Other Books If You Are a Potterhead
tags: [books]
date: 2025-02-21
---

# Please Read Other Books If You Are a Potterhead

There's probably 3 ways you can go after having read and been obsessed with Harry Potter as a kid, like I was, and you look up after "all was well" and realize that this story that has grown up alongside you is now over.
1. Re-read the books forever, or consume and attempt to enjoy the related pieces of media that get sharted out from time to time (the Eddie Redmayne movies, the Cursed Child, the video game)
2. Fanfiction
3. Actually reading another fantasy novel

I've definitely oscillated between all three of these stages in my post-Potter recovery, and I'd like to evangelize the third route (especially now that the fanfiction dot net well has largely dried up). I do occasionally return to passages, mostly in the Order of the Phoenix, for a cozy little reread, but I'm at the stage now where the biggest gift Harry Potter has gotten me is an introduction into the broader world of Sci-Fi and Fantasy (hereafter SFF). This also doubles as my personal SFF starter recommendation; I have a decent enough number of friends who want to get back into reading/get into reading this genre that it helps to have a centralized list, so watch this space for updates as I read more. (Sorted by maturity/age range)

### Middle Grade
DISCLAIMER: Around the time I was in middle school and musical theater started to be reintroduced into the mainstream via Hamilton, people were pretty vocal about a "musical theater pipeline" that always consisted of Hamilton, Heathers, Dear Even Hansen, and Be More Chill, and I think the same sort of middle grade/YA pipeline novel pipeline definitely existed. It goes: Harry Potter, Percy Jackson, the Hunger Games, Divergent, and sometimes the Mortal Instruments (which, interestingly, was a descendant of Harry Potter fanfiction, so it comes full circle). I'll refrain from recommending these because 1) people know about them already and 2) this specific collection of series' carbon dates me with insane precision and so I imagine it is outdated.

Disclaimer aside. I definitely think that Harry Potter draws a lot of elementary schoolers for its exploration of the whimsical and magical in what seem to be ordinary spaces. What if that cat sitting on top of a traffic light was actually a Magical Professor of Shapeshifting? What if that platform divider was a secret portal to a magical universe? It's imagination fodder for a young brain, especially in that transitional period at the beginning of the books where the magic begins to reveal itself. I particularly remembered the "gateway moment" for these series:

- **The Books of Elsewhere**. Bonus points for the old house/library atmosphere. I'm not sure if the light/dark academia obsession came from Harry Potter, but it certainly was magnified by it (Very intentionally, I think. The series was inspired by those old Brish Public School novels and attempted to bring them into the modern day.), and The Books of Elsewhere definitely deliver on the environment.
- **Alex Rider**. Not sci-fi or fantasy at all but I would be remiss to not recommend one of the great loves of my elementary school days, plus it's got that similarly excellent "gateway" moment. Think of it like a kid James Bond. This series had me so hooked that I continued to read it after the author started releasing more books when I was in **high school**, whereupon I realized that the writing quality was definitely middle grade all along.
- **Keeper of the Lost Cities**. I aged out of these books as they were being published, so I think I only got up to Lodestar, but I can definitely vouch for it up until there. This series introduced me to the prologue that flashes forward to the end of the book, so it's guaranteed to keep you hooked to at least understand how they get to that point. Notable things about this series are the lush descriptions of fairy food (I've never wanted to try any fantasy food so much as Mallowmelt) and the love triangle/quadrangle/septagon, if you're into that. I think I transitioned from liking Sofitz (Sophie and Fitz) to Sophie and Keefe after book 4. I don't know what the ship name is but I imagine it is something like covfefe.
- I didn't like **Charlie Bone** much, honestly because I found the exposition too similar to Harry Potter, but it's not actually similar at all, so give that a try. The environent is very whimsical, but so are a lot of novels on this list.
- Speaking of expositions that sound similar to Harry Potter, my Brandon Sanderson phase (see below) caught me too late to ever read **Alcatraz Smedry**, but I've heard good things about it.
- **Alistair Grimm's Odditorium**. Similar whimsical vibes to Charlie Bone (and similar plot twist oops) but I liked it a lot more.
The other thing I enjoyed about Harry Potter was the emphasis on the magical and mystical nature of books and memories. I'd definitely styled myself a "lover of books" after reading the series for the third time (21 books, if you ignore the fact that they're all the same 7 books) so these especially tugged at my book lover heartstrings:
- **Inkheart/steel/death** (or anyting by Cornelia Funke). Her writing still holds up for me. I remember especially being in awe at the sense of scale of these from a relatively cozy premise.
- **A Dash of Magic!!!** I've never seen anyone talk about these but I absolutely ate them up as a kid (no pun intended). A family of magical bakers using magic recipes for good and chaos. I think this was my earliest introduction to a consistent and explainable system (in the biz we call these hard magic systems) via the recipes.
- **The Blackthorn Key**. I loved this book with my whole heart (I think there were sequels but I never got around to reading them). Not magical per se, unless you could medieval potions, but filled with such interesting puzzles and codes and ciphers that they might as well be magic. The friendship in this book between Christopher and Tom is also very Golden Trio-like, and the emotional highs and lows of I think all 7 HP books were accomplished by this one.

### Young Adult
This is sort of a catch-all category for me, since I think the "Young Adult" moniker is a relatively new one in publishing. This was around the age where I started reading actual high fantasy novels, and the writing quality is generally better than their middle grade equivalents, but the subject matter may or may not require a higher maturity level. These include:
- **Lord of The Rings** teehee. I said I would refrain from putting down stuff that is widely popular, but I read these when I was in elementary school, hated them, then read them again about 4 years later and saw the matrix. I would really suggest giving them another try if you didn't like them when you were younger. I doubly appreciate these because I can appreciate the lineage shared by the fantasy that came after it (especially Wheel of Time - see below).
- In that same vein, **A Wizard of Earthsea**. If you wanted a magical school, say no more, because this one also has dragons. I love a good dragon book and I think I really missed the hype of Eragon, but this one felt so much more tender. I'd love to revisit these, because I think I would appreciate a lot more the way LeGuin writes about names and destinies.
- **Memory, Sorrow, and Thorn**. Nobody ever talks about these, so they might actually be doodoo on the reread, but it's such a classic Hero's Journey archetype that it felt like an instant classic. I remember liking the Black Cauldron for similar reasons, but the details feel too fuzzy for me to recommend it here.
- **Discworld**. Yeah, I'm putting Discworld here. It's such an easy introduction if you ignore the gigantic graphs about where to start, because the books are all about 200-300 pages and there are several self-contained story arcs to follow. There's also so much content that you won't run into the "what do I do now" problem for a while. There are some books (particularly the Death cycle) that probably merit some amount of emotional maturity, but the vast majority of the humor is fairly nonspecific political satire and that British kind of slapstick humor, so I think it's enjoyable earlier. My personal favorite entry point is the Moist Von Lipwig sequence - the payoff feels a little more earned than some of the other books, since you are following a skilled conman instead of a purposefully incompetent character, which happens fairly often, and the romance is honestly the cutest one I've read in fantasy.
Actual "Young Adult" novels:
- **Six of Crows** (and sequel). The world and politics and relationships are so well done for a book this size, and the central conceit of a heist is also very sexy and cool. If you felt let down about the relative importance given to the main characters of Harry Potter, say no more because I tink all 6 POV characters here are equally interesting for different reasons.
- **A Darker Shade of Magic**. My best friend thinks the Vicious novels are better so look into those if you're interested but I've never read them. I read this earlier this year and I was underwhelmed but only because it read very much like a YA novel to me, so I imagine someone in that age range would get a lot out of it. For one, more heist shenanigans. Other features of this book include: a fun and internally consistent magic system, an interesting political setup that could be well developed in future books, and an enemies-to-lovers style romance. Decreasing in order of my enjoyment.
- **The Rithmatist**. I feel as though I'm the only person in the world who still cares about The Rithmatist. The sequel was supposed to come out in 2017, and while Brandon Sanderson is one of the few authors whom I'd trust to getting around to writing every book he's planned to write, there's no mention of it on his updates. This book absolutely rocked my little world. It has chalk based magic system where chapters are interspersed with "textbook" clippings of how the magic system works, the effects of which are shown on the plot as the magic system unveils. It also feels as though it treats this magic realistically - it's being used to fight actual battles at some border, but in an academic setting, it's mostly used for duels and sport. Bonus points for deliciously described food and a "finding out if you have magic at a certain age" conceit, if you missed those from Harry Potter. This book also introduced me to Brandon Sanderson, for which I'll always be grateful. After this I read Steelheart, which was not very good, and Elantris, which was very good, and then...
- **Mistborn**. Yet another fantasy heist. It's an amagamation of several satisfying character arcs, so it's an immediately comforting read, but the magic system will absolutely blow your mind. It'll also open you up to the Cosmere, which will keep you covered, content wise, for at least two lifetimes.

### Adult Fantasy
This is where I mostly sit now. The difficulty with recommending anything in this genre is that, while everything is usually high quality, the activation energy required to pick up an undertaking like Wheel of Time bodes ill for a list that is supposed to be for "beginners", so I will try to be mindful of this.
- **Dresden Files**. Absolutely my first recommendation for anyone interested in SFF and anyone going through withdrawal from books about wizards named Harry. He's basically a wizard gumshoe in the city of Chicago, so the earlier books are very episodic in nature and quick reads. Of course, the series is like 15 books long and eventually turns into epic fantasy, but you can stop whenever and you'll be left with a satisfying arc. My favorite part about this series is that it reads like a video game - Harry has all of these leads he can track down, as well as all of these building blocks of magic and sources of information that he can develop now and satisfyingly use later, so it feels like you're playing in the sandbox of his life. It's also one of the best hard magic systems I've read, based on thermodynamics, and is suffused with this kind of Spider-Man morality that I'm really into. The first book in particular does my favorite thing with SFF exposition and gives it consequences in the real world, in a scene towards the end that I genuinely did not breathe during. Biggest disclaimer is that it does sort of follow the genre conventions of having a pretty high sex drive; I just try to ignore it, but it is definitely not for kids.
- **The Kingkiller Chronicles**. This came to mind next because the author of this book series said his favorite books series was Dresden. Yet another reason to read it. Tangent aside, the Kingkiller chronicles does really feel like an aged-up version of the 6th and 7th Harry Potter books. For one, there's a magic school involved. For another, you really get to live in the mind of Kvothe and see him develop as a character. I think the main romantic relationship in this series is better than most SFF series, as well. Only downside is that it's still a "work in progress", which is usually the big drawback of reading adult fantasy.
- **The Gentlemen Bastards**. That's right, kids. Yet another fantasy heist. I'm not kidding when I say this is the best first book in a series I have ever read. It is so good that it skyrocketed my expectations of the whole series, and the quality does drop from there, but all the books on the whole are still enjoyable. The politics and worldbuilding of all of the different interests and cities in this single book are so good that it is matched only by what several Wheel of Time books could accomplish. Bonus points for delicious food descriptions and a bromance that I promise is better than any relationship you can find in the rest of the genre. The heist is clever, and it does that consequences thing again, in a climax that just keeps building and building. Highly, highly recommend. Disclaimer: suffers from the Rothfuss problem and only has 3 books, but if you ignore the implications of the very very end they're a satisfying set.
- **The Locked Tomb**. I haven't read beyond the first book of this, but my sister swears by the rest of the series. This is for anyone that was into Drarry, and probably the only good fantasy romance out there. It's that Tumblr idea of sensuality where the two character hold each other at swordpoint then kiss.
I don't think these have anything to do with Harry Potter but I wanted to include them as a type of "secondhand" recommendation, if you liked any of the books that were mentioned here:
- **Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy** and **Kings of the Wyld**, if you liked Discworld. Genuinely laugh-out-loud fully.
- **The Book of the New Sun**, if you liked the Kingkiller Chronicles. Similarly follows the trajectory of a single character in painstaking detail. Definitely not for beginners though. I'm currently rereading it and I still have to really think to understand what's going on.
